we go inside the biggest murder
investigation in Queensland's history
the hunt for Daniel Malcolm's killer
it's an extraordinary covert operation
to outsmart and capture the worst kind
of monster an opportunistic predator who
can't control himself when it comes to
sexually molesting young boys tonight
Brett Peter Cohen's other victims are
courageously speaking for the first time
a father of three who nearly 30 years
ago was Cohen's first victim and a
shattered woman who was Cohen's
girlfriend at the time of his second
attack their stories are haunting also
you'll hear exclusive details of the
moment Cowan was arrested and how
forensic experts found Daniel's body and
there every step of the way through ten
long years were Daniel's parents Bruce
and Denise who vowed to never give up
until they found their boy and his
killer was caught
[Music]
it's unbearably cruel and desperately
unfair but a family gathering for the
Malcolm's means a visit to the symmetry
the Daniel used to always swing clowns
wear a watch off after school boys
picked him for you because this is where
Daniel is
and nothing can ever change that
I thought fair I think it's dusting it
it's now more than 10 years since Daniel
was murdered a decade of despair for
Bruce and Denise Daniel's older brother
Dean and bread
Daniel's twin
[Music]
what is it that you miss the most about
Daniel I'm just probably just being a
normal family he always used to bring me
flowers and follow knickknacks but he's
always gonna be that 13 year old as me
maybe one knows that face
is there something in particular you
miss about your son I think you know to
watch him grow up and and become the man
he should have been you know
[Music]
well being his twin now when it comes to
your birthday which is a joint birthday
with Daniel
what are those moments like they're
always hard
suppose I've had ten birthdays now we've
had him so not that they get any easier
but I remember that first the first one
twelve days after it disappeared and mmm
I was terrible and because he
disappeared so close to Christmas what
is Christmas like in your family every
year he still gets a a seat at the table
with his photo on the table and he
always gets a I guess it's a Cheers
and then with Christmas and and that but
yeah I guess it's it's not it's not the
same as it would have been
Bruce and Denice Malcolm are the
embodiment of good triumphing over evil
they've devoted the past three thousand
seven hundred and fifty two days since
Daniel disappeared to finding him and
catching his killer
Bret Peter Cowan
and then you heard those three words
guilty guilty
muttered under my breath yes I wanted to
scream out but I just knew I couldn't do
that but I said yes and I turned around
and I saw Bruce his eyes were watering
Dean and Bradley were in tears and
resumed its no can't believe it
[Music]
we say would get justice and that's what
we've got
we'll go and visit Daniel on the weekend
and let him know we made a promise to
him that's what we've done we don't
break promises a week what do you think
the prisoner might be doing tonight
having bread and water I hope it was
more than we've had you think
Queensland's Sunshine Coast is a
wonderful place to raise a family
it coax the Malcolm's from Victoria
years ago and their home videos
typically show a young families fun but
they also reveal why Daniels abduction
and murder has touched all of us so
deeply in these pictures we see
ourselves and our own kids it's just a
amazing run of incredible sequences that
are all bad and you can't undo it I'm
afraid no but you must just go over that
and over that know that then ask why
yeah look this is why us lots of things
you know so many what-ifs that day
it was early Sunday afternoon on the 7th
of December 2003 less than two weeks to
Daniels 14th birthday less than three to
Christmas Daniel needed a haircut and he
wanted to buy Christmas presents for his
family so he left home about a kilometer
away and walked here to catch a bus as
he'd done countless times before from
what we now know Daniels fate was sealed
that day by a collision of unlikely and
unlucky events ultimately the Daniel the
difference between life and death came
down to just three minutes a tiny moment
in time but as it's so tragically turned
out certainly long enough for evil to
strike
as Daniel waits at the bus stop that day
Brett Peter Cowen is alone in his white
four-wheel drive
he's 34 known to police for a string of
crimes drugs and theft but most
seriously vicious attacks and rapes on
young boys
tragically for Daniel out of sight up
the road is the bus he should have been
catching but it's broken down
Britt Cowen drives past the broken down
bus and then around the next bend he
spots the stranded 13-year old he knew
the area incredibly well saw the kid in
the red t-shirt his urges had come back
and he's a filthy person so he's
probably thought to himself it's time in
that very instant this predator decides
to strike
he takes the very next exit less than 50
meters from Daniel and doubles back to a
car path behind where Daniel is waiting
perhaps we should have as parents
equipped Daniel with additional skills
to recognize potential danger and to run
away when a goofy persons perhaps trying
to attract his attention and and in a
moment of weakness encourage him to go
with him in each vehicle you know that's
just a terrible thing that it wants us
to be honest
at the bus stop Cowen loiters behind
Daniel pretending to also wait for the
bus
witnesses remember his distinctive
stance they also remember seeing Daniel
drawing in the dirt
then the best luck for Cowan the worst
for Daniel the replacement bus doesn't
stop even though the driver knows
Daniels there
LastPass
Daniel doesn't know it but another bus
is coming to pick him up it's only three
minutes away but less than three minutes
is all it takes for bread Cowan to
Swoopes how do you think coun convinced
Daniel to get into the car well that's
one thing I just don't understand I
don't know
[Music]
maybe he was frustrated but I don't know
how he convinced him I don't know
Cowan doesn't take Daniel to the shops
as he promised he drives 30 minutes
south to a secluded farm bordered by
bush by this time Daniel Malcolm must
have been beside himself with fear
it's a terrible place it's a scary no
why not you would if you were sitting in
the passenger seat with an unknown
driver down that dirt road in Farrell
bush you would know your body would be
telling you I'm on a hell of a lot of
trouble here and you'd probably smell
death you know you've really got to be
thinking I gotta get out of here I'm if
he was able to
[Music]
what exactly happened to Daniel will
never be known Cowen a Crim and a liar
claims he panicked and strangled Daniel
very soon after arriving at the farm
you then dumped the little boy in the
bush
[Music]
when did you first realize something was
wrong it was about quarter past four I
just got a weird feeling I don't know
what it was so I said to Bruce I'm gonna
go up to the bus stop deceive if Daniels
air and I saw the broken down bus being
put on a tow truck
so Bruce went down to see if he was on a
bus at left to five pacify so he got
there about 5:30 when he came back and
when you straight away there was
something wrong we need that night after
doing their own immediate search for
their son Bruce and Denise called in the
police Assistant Commissioner Mike
Condon how quickly did police take
Daniels disappearance seriously I think
the first day there has been some
criticism about the way in which it was
handled but certainly I was on the
ground two days later as the head of the
homicide squad so by that time you knew
this wasn't just a runaway you never
know for sure but sometimes you just get
a gut feeling that this is not right and
it's not gonna end well
[Music]
just are so innocent
Stoney's school not a care in the world
as ours became days and days weeks
the search for Daniel just got bigger
and bigger if anyone's got any
information and it's on their conscience
who they please come forward and I need
our burden he very quickly became
Australia's most recognized missing
person and that was thanks to the
unrelenting efforts of his mum and dad
it's a revolution that they've started
and it reminds us every day our
responsibility to make sure our children
are safe you know we were never going to
go away
and we hope that our attitude has
inspired some of those police officers
along the journey that have been
frustrated and thought this is never
going to go anywhere but Shelvin let's
turn it to a cold case we said no and I
know even finished it go and guys coming
down the Morgans desperate search for
Daniel who in fact searching on her
hands and knees Brett Cohen's evil past
in vain and demon
thirty years after three decades his
first victim speaks out I haven't
figured I haven't forgotten any of it
that's next on 60 minutes we now know
that Bret Cowan is an opportunistic and
devious sexual predator but Bruce and
Denice Malcolm could have no idea about
Cowan's evil past as their desperate
search for Daniel turned into a
relentless hunt for his killer Cowan's
depravity began 16 years before Daniels
murder when he snatched and brutally
molested a seven-year-old boy in
Brisbane that young boy survived but is
now a broken man
tonight he's bravely speaking after a 27
year silence his story is harrowing and
chilling for its similarities to
Daniel's case
at 33 and six-foot-five tim nichols is a
big bear of a man he's a farmer with a
family of his own now but most of his
life has been shadowed by a violent
sexual attack he suffered when he was
just seven years old I was abroad
student then after that my schooling why
I had achieved my happiness was didn't
have it no more he took a lot away from
you didn't he he took everything he took
my life
[Music]
for Brett Cowan the young Tim Nichols
was just prey a plaything who like
Daniel just happened to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time did he say
anything to you did he did he say he was
sorry just said he would find me and
kill me if I said anything and I was
petrified all my life you know was he
just going to turn up was he gonna get
me
suburban Brisbane Saturday the 5th of
December 1987 and Tim and his young
mates are at their regular childcare
centre also there is 18 year old Brett
Cowan
unbeknown to the kids or their parents
he's a young Krim made to work as part
of his court-ordered community service
punishment for break and enter and
stealing he was in orange overalls and I
just went to give him a helping hand
with a couple other kids and what was he
like
yes you talked here for the next hour
Cowen tries to groomed him gives him
jobs and befriends him after a while the
7 year old gets bored until Cowan
deviously lures him back this moment in
time changes everything for this
happy-go-lucky child
let me think
no he just yelled yes he wants a golf
ball and we all put our hands up and
don't know why but he just pointed to me
and he said you have to come into the
toilets and I said no and then he
grabbed me and picked me up and took me
into the toilets and at that point that
he picked you up what did you think was
going on I didn't know I couldn't say
anything he had his hand over my mouth
do you remember what you were feeling or
fearing at that point scared didn't know
what was happening the abduction is as
sickeningly brazen as it is
opportunistic cow and locks himself in a
cubicle with the petrified team
[Music]
do you remember what you said to him no
I told him I was gonna tell my mum and
he started to strangle me
he threatened he was gonna kill me
grabbed me by the throat mmm if I didn't
do it
I thought I was gonna die so that Thresh
you believed it you believed that he
would kill you I was only a kid of
course I did
I thought I was I thought I was dying
that day I didn't know what he was gonna
do to me how extensive was the abuse hmm
horrific I have trouble telling anyone I
did it I won't tell you what he done but
it's just it's just it's hard yeah it's
not because you've forgotten is that I
haven't forgotten I haven't forgotten
any of it
[Music]
behind that locked cubicle door Cowan
repeatedly raped Tim it only stopped
when a childcare worker called out his
name if it wasn't for that person I
don't know what her name was or who she
was if she didn't come and say Timmy you
in there
I believe it wouldn't be
Cowan was quickly arrested for the rape
of Tim Nichols but he was also given
bail and like a coward Cowan did a
runner he evaded police for two years
when he was finally caught in New South
Wales he was brought back here to
Queensland to face justice and to face
Tim who crucially was brave enough to
testify against him
[Music]
you're just a little kid how tough was
it for you to be in that courtroom and
to tell everybody what had happened to
you I had to look at him it was hard I
had to point him to the person he
attacked me and he was sitting there
with a smile on his face just staring at
me and it was I still remember that it
was like it was a game to him like it
was just smiling that's all I can
remember him just smile and across the
room
unbelievably Cowan got two years for his
rape of Tim and even more astonishing
served little more than half the
sentence so imagine then the more comes
horror when they discovered Cowan sick
past and just how little time he spent
behind bars
was something we don't understand we've
readied his his place briefed and we
knew his past criminal history but we've
never been allowed to say anything about
him and if he'd never been let out of
jail we wouldn't be sitting here today
Daniel would still be alive this would
never have happened
it's not an isolated case he hasn't made
a blue and regretted you know he's been
a demon for nearly thirty years it's
just a shocking record Cowan was always
a ticking time bomb before he murdered
Daniel there would be yet another victim
coming up it's just a cover for the evil
man tease his girlfriend's night of
terror he came home in her church with
me and the police closed in on Brett
Peter :
that's next on 60 minutes the hunt for
Daniel Malcolm's killer is all the more
traumatic by the fact that Brett Peter
Cohen had a sordid history of pedophilia
after attacking Tim Nichols back in 1987
cow and moved to Darwin where he'd
strike again and this time he'd try to
kill the boy tonight for the first time
Cowens then-girlfriend speaks out and as
you'll see she's still haunted by every
detail
it was Darwin 1993 and this woman Tracy
was just 18 little did she know the man
she was sharing a caravan with here her
very first boyfriend was a predator who
was about to strike again and even now
it's harrowing for her to talk about it
[Music]
people have described Bricktown as an
animal as a monster I knew got very very
close to this man denier how would you
describe him at the beginning before I
knew anything charming and confident
very happy but that was just a cover for
the evil manis he's not even a man I
don't even know what to call him
clearly he's very good at living two
lives his name very good he's fought a
lot of people
this is Tracy's first time back to the
caravan park in 20 years
and little boy who was attacked how
close did he lived to you two caravans
away you know 20 steps
this is also the first time Traci's
retraced the events of the evening of
Thursday the 23rd of September 1993 when
Brett Cowan closed in on his
six-year-old neighbor how difficult
would it have been for Brett to lure
that little boy down here oh not
difficult he trusted Brady knew Brett
and he must have said something to him
like he couldn't have taken him
screaming people would have heard you
know
it was just like any other get-together
Tracy and friends from the caravan park
were having their weekly barbecue Brett
was still at work or so Tracy thought
and the young boy was nowhere to be
found as dusk fell his mother became
frantic
[Music]
[Applause]
he was kidnapped sometime between 5 and
7 p.m. but took him out the side guide
at BP Palms caravan park took him into
the bushes molested him for I don't know
how long and left him in a boot of a
burnt-out car with rocks and bricks and
everything on top and left for dead by
7:30 p.m. Brett was back hiding in his
Caravan as the owls were on there was
still no sign of the boy
did you see Brett that day that night
yes what was his demeanor like very
weird what was it about his behavior
that was really weird he came home and
had sex with me but I didn't like the
smell or what he was doing to me I don't
do leave me alone covered in blood with
a punctured lung and broken collarbone
both eyes hemorrhaging because during
the rape pound had tried to suffocate
him somehow miraculously the
six-year-old managed to find his way out
of the bush and back to the caravan park
the attack was so violent the injury is
so extensive it was thought the child
had been in a road accident
and for days we thought he'd been hit by
a car for days two to three days then we
got around that something more sinister
it happened what was the word what were
people saying they were looking for
someone in the park that had kidnapped
him and molested him they're looking for
a rock spider so you know had no inkling
you had no suspicion that the rock
spider was Brett Keller your boyfriend
what was his reaction to the word that
that this child had been molested by a
pedophile so we got to get that bastard
we got a foreign team you know whoever
he is and you believe that he had a
hatred of pedophiles he wanted to kill
him himself if he suitable finally we'll
get him
Cowan was sentenced to seven years for
his brutal attack on that six-year-old
boy here in Darwin but serve just four
and half years after telling police he
knew he needed help even then a lone
psychologist raised doubts about Cowan's
claims of remorse but the judge
despite noting that Cowen was a
pathological liar gave him the benefit
of the doubt clearly a horrible pattern
had been set opportunistic attacks on
very young boys with Karin becoming ever
more violent it seems with his release
the abduction and murder of Daniel
Malcolm was inevitable are you
comfortable with the priority you gave
to count at the time along with the
other suspects were looking at
absolutely and bearing in mind he was
never considered anything else but a
high-level person of interest
Assistant Commissioner Mike Condon says
police first interviewed Cowen a known
pedophile two weeks after Daniels
disappearance there were holes in his
alibi but even still they didn't have
the proof they needed
considering his past considering that
he'd placed himself at the spot where
Daniel had gone missing considering that
there had been some doubt about his
timings why wasn't he the person of
highest interest and because there were
other persons of interest who were
familiar with the area that if you were
taking off boxes I take the boxes as
well
twenty thousand leads fifteen thousand
inquiries with Crime Stoppers this
investigation was ten times the size of
most homicide cases
[Music]
while police were swamped with
information so too were Bruce and Denise
who tirelessly followed up every call
and clue and conducted many of their own
searches we're looking and when a junk
pile we found some red cloth material
and of course you know will immediately
drawn that is potentially Daniels
t-shirt so you know way back to that one
searching on her hands and knees with
scrapping with her fingernails were also
great to me minute with their
investigations took them into a world
they never wanted to see to talk to
scumbags they never wanted to meet you
were confronting pedophiles yeah but
they're generally weak gutless people
really did you hear some terrible things
oh look over the over the journey people
fed us some shocking lawyers really
different stories of what happened to
Daniel yeah
drugged smashed with the steel bar and
the bushes hidden on desk evaders and
hundreds of things hundreds of different
things emails and letters we used to get
all the time
[Music]
but ultimately their biggest win was
finally convincing the coroner to hold
an inquest in 2010 to cross-examine the
long list of persons of interest of
course the Queensland coroner has
additional powers to police you know
they can ask a person of interest very
specific questions under oath and their
kin can be compelled to answer those and
so we thought that was the right way to
go and it proved again breaker
[Music]
on the 31st of March 2011 seven years
after Daniel was taken breasts Peter
Cowen now living in Perth was forced to
appear at the inquest in Brisbane as
Karen was walking into the courtroom I
just got a really cold shiver and the
whole courtroom just went oh my god and
I turn around to priests and I went oh
my god that's that's him
then he was just horrible it was
horrible
he was asked a series of questions at
the inquest one of his responses was
that he couldn't have abducted Daniel
because no he said he didn't Daniel was
13 years old he liked sixty
eight-year-old boys so he wouldn't have
done it yes we just went oh my god
you've gotta be joking how the police
knew all this as well but I mean after
the cranial we nearly flew over to Perth
to do what to find him but luckily we
didn't because we didn't know the covert
operation had started a few days
beforehand independently of the inquest
police were reviewing the Malcolm case
at which time Colin's alibi fell apart
he was due to fly home to Perth after
two days in the witness box and it was
now police launched their audacious
undercover operations Cowan is now the
prime suspect how would you describe the
police operation that happens from there
absolutely remarkable who would have
thought such a wacky a wacky covert
operation would work like that
by the time Cowan was on the flight back
home to Western Australia police had
planted an undercover cop right next to
him going by the name of Joe they
exchanged phone numbers contact has been
made what Cowan so clearly thought was
just a chance meeting with a like-minded
fellow passenger was the in police so
desperately needed Cowan was hooked and
so the predator was now the prey this
five our friendship turned into a
massive five-month long undercover
investigation so detailed so ambitious
it needs to be seen to be believed
coming up police set the trap to catch a
killer police the moment Cowan's past
catches up with him what was his
reaction when he saw you and the man who
found Daniel for Bruce and Denis that
one phone call changed everybody's life
that's next on 16 ins Daniel's parents
Bruce and Denise always wanted to find
their son first and get justice for him
second after eight long years undercover
police are about to help them realize
both goals they set an elaborate trap to
catch a pedophile but that was just the
beginning of some stunning police work
it started so simply
a chance meeting on a long flight to
Perth or so this pedophile thought big
mouth shut - a friendship is strung I
mean understand the trap is set from
there undercover police posing as a band
of criminal brothers recruit Brett Cohen
into their game their organized crime
spree starts with small-time drug
dealing melon war and grows into debt
collecting pimping and buying and
selling weapons very quickly Cowan's
trust is one over that was the
breakthrough wasn't it well in terms of
taking us to a new level
absolutely when you are part of a covert
operation like that that is so extensive
so broad how nervous are you of pulling
it off you don't sleep Queensland
Assistant Commissioner Mike Condon
coordinated the operation in Perth from
Brisbane for five sleepless months
there's a high expectation when some
at all
that'll be sold the stakes were high
they had one chance to get it right and
I was extreme caution I was very mindful
that this was a critical milestone in
the investigation and to progress to a
point where I was satisfied we had
sufficient evidence to arrest
cooperation was critical the extent of
the policing in Western Australia was
breathtaking more than 20 different
scenarios leading to the most important
setup of all in a hotel room a meeting
between Cowan and the crime gang boss
Arnold Cowan is being offered a role in
a big drug job for which he'll get a
hundred thousand dollars we've got a
problem so he doesn't jeopardize the
deal all the gang he needs to come clean
on his dirty parts Daniel Moore promoter
if he does
Arnold promises to fix it is there
something you need to tell me all and
bearing in mind that this whole what we
do is based on respect and honesty all
right the squeeze is on the undercover
cop tell his Cowan he doesn't care what
he's done he just needs to know I've got
no qualms at all what they get up to
doesn't faze me at all Bret Peter Cowan
is suck it in it's so quiet almost
nonchalant but this is the moment
undercover police have been working and
hoping for cow and confesses to Daniel's
abduction and murder
you know hearing him explain what he did
and how he did it does that answer all
the questions you have over what
happened to Daniel he is a lying
pedophile so you've really got to assess
what you can check what you can verify
but what he actually did you know
nothing stacks up never got to molest
him or anything like that he panicked
and I panicked and grabbed him around
the throw from before immunity is dead
why didn't they not have clothes on it
but don't understand that and why wasn't
Daniel's belt looped through his pants
you know was he bound up in his belt
really we don't want to go there
sometimes it's best we don't know
it's the 11th of August 2011 he doesn't
know it yet but this is Brett Collins
last day of freedom not only have the
police recorded a video confession
they've now convinced Cowen to bring
them back to where he killed Daniel on
the pretext of making sure there's no
incriminating evidence left at the sighs
those covert operators we can never say
thank you enough to those guys and to
the people who set that up as well for
what they do that didn't live and
breathe with Carolyn for months and
could you believe that Cowan fell for it
that's the amazing thing
we can't believe how stupid Karen was I
was the arresting officer one of my aims
of the day was to conduct an interview
with mr. Cowan if he chose to for
detective Senior Sergeant Steve Blanche
field everything was riding on this
moment the police net was closing in
we had a number of officers hidden we
also had recording equipment so that we
were recording the conversations and
that and in videoing what was occurring
and that was how it happened
Cowan still unaware of the trap text the
undercover police on a grisly tool they
mark their path to later retrace their
steps
and then the arresting officers pounced
[Music]
French Allen you're under arrest the
photo of Daniel Wolff what was his
reaction when he saw you he was a little
stunned for a moment but not a lot has
changed with mr. Cowan throughout this
he's been very composed and shown very
little in the way of emotion so you
didn't see a moment in his eyes when the
light bulb went off and he's got on now
oh just been caught there was a moment
so police had their man Cowen had first
confessed and then incredibly he brought
them back here to the area where the
murder took place but still they didn't
have Daniel what came next was as
impressive as the undercover police
operation the forensic team now talked
over and for the next three months here
on hands and knees they literally left
no stone unturned we had to think
outside the square for all of our
options but we didn't stop until we
found them
for the first time police are prepared
to reveal the intricate work they did in
this sensitive place and detail the
horror of what Cowen did here how do you
find coming back here I find it very sad
inspector Artie van penthouse was
charged with pulling together a massive
forensic team two days after Cowen was
arrested to be honest that one phone
call changed everybody's life police had
been led to this place by a man who had
confessed to murdering Daniel and
leaving him here now they had to find
him
the information was that mr. Cowen had
arrived here before strolling Daniel
over the years going down the escarpment
there and drag Daniel down through an
area which is about 30 meters down there
to a pond of water
but despite more than a thousand SES
volunteers and police painstakingly
scouring this place the first days of
the search were fruitless four days and
there's nothing what was that like it
was it was extremely frustrating you
weren't giving up hope at the stage
there was no way of giving up hope this
was our first window of opportunity in
eight years their faith paid off because
on the fourth day of searching they had
their first breakthrough day four was
both a exciting one for us and a sad one
because it was proof to us that we were
in the right spot we had found a globe
shoe which was similar to what Daniel
was wearing at the time he disappeared
and they found another shoe there's a
couple days later they found the left
shoe just over here so then I guess the
drivers to find Daniel himself that's
correct I was quietly optimistic that we
were going to find all inspector
penthouse was right while this gully was
being searched the police diving team
was concentrating on couch and creak a
few kilometres away
it's where Cowen had tossed Daniels
clothes after murdering him
they found remnants of Daniels
Underpants a belt and his incredibly
well-preserved shorts they were caught
in the roots would have fallen log down
there you couldn't imagine that they'd
still be there now it was an amazing
find that's for sure
it took another four weeks of meticulous
hand sifting through the sands and
undergrowth but finally they found what
they were here for
this is the location where we found the
majority of Daniels remains in this area
here seventeen fragments seventeen
fragments in total it doesn't sound much
but it was a major point for us I just
can't quite comprehend you know how how
do you react when you told you we think
that this might be your son we should
have bacon some phone said they found a
bone they didn't know whether it was
genuine not and then he phoned back and
said yes it is the bones of a young
juvenile so we just you know assumed it
was Daniel but we didn't know until a
week later it was pretty tough yeah
tough to was Cowan's decision to plead
not guilty despite the overwhelming
evidence and then two and a half years
after Daniel was found and cow and
arrested the jury went out
Bruce and Denise will have to wait
another 24 10 sounds Denise what are you
most anxious about just the longer we
have to wait whether it's going to be
guilty or not guilty
none of us like waiting finally the
phone call to return to court and the
guilty verdict everyone was waiting for
[Music]
compelling evidence has found beyond
reasonable doubt mr. Cohen's guilt
coming up Bruce and Denise react to
cow's life sentence he'll be there
forever you reckon
yep he'll die in jail and they're pushed
to protect kids from pedophiles they
should be only register from from day
one so no second chance no that's next
on 60 minutes on Friday Bret Peter Cowan
was sentenced to life in prison for
murdering Daniel Malcolm the judge
described Cohen as a convincing
plausible and adaptable liar now it's
fitting that Bruce and Denice Malcolm
both towers of dignity strength and
respect have the last word on the killer
his sentence and how they'd like Daniel
to be remembered on Friday the Malcolm's
tried to be a normal family if just for
a moment they chose not to go to court
to see Brett Cowan be sentenced to life
imprisonment with a minimum non-parole
period of 20 years for murdering their
Daniel it's a how many interest did we
end up with on Facebook last night when
I went today it was about one point two
seven million that they were relieved
when they heard that regular boy
justice a concern has delivered a really
substantial penalty and we acknowledge
that he'll be there forever you reckon
yep he'll die in jail Denise what was
your reaction 20 years no I was happy
with that you know hopefully he's dead
brother Tommy 60 so I won't have to
worry about the non-parole period so for
you is this it
I mean do you feel like you've come to
the end of something today that feels a
bit strange it sort of feels like it's
sort of not being at the moment you know
we've got all Daniels
belongings at holman and maybe we can go
through them and and sort that sort of
thing
why have you held on till now to do that
never want to let him go space
we know the answer
you'll never let him go no he's always
at 13 your book soon after Daniel went
missing Bruce and Denise started the
Daniel Malcolm Foundation initially as a
way to publicize their son's
disappearance but it's grown into so
much more
and as Daniels legacy it's good work
will go on educating school kids all
over the country and supporting people
like Tim nickel back to your life before
you wanted to meet nice to meet you a
gentle but broken Souls who three
decades later is still struggling
because of Britt Cowan what would you
like to do to him kill him so he done he
doesn't get it and he can't do it any
anyone else would serve jail time myself
today that other kids that save I don't
have a strong thing or the right thing
but I'd sooner sit-in so I know that
I've saved someone just I know you'll do
it again if he gets here can you ever
forgive Britt count for what he's done
know what forgive back
he destroyed a innocent boy and he took
his life away
No I'll never forget him I knew he's
committed the most heinous of crimes you
do not offend against our children
you do not abduct them and you did not
attempt to sexually assault them and you
certainly do not kill them and then
after all of that show no remorse from
that's why there's no forgiveness
because he's had no remorse to the
family and stuffing stuffing we're
stopping what about the debate of having
a public register of pedophiles so that
people are aware of where these sex
offenders are living
um I think once I've offended the first
time and been charged and found guilty
for that offense they should be on the
register from from day one
so no second chance no five seconds
Bret Peter Cowan will only be remembered
for all the wrong reasons
the Daniel Malcolm will be remembered
for so much more a child so loved by his
parents and a nation he'll never be
forgotten
what do you think Daniel would think of
you his mum and dad fighting so hard for
him you'd hope you'd be proud he was a
very shy person so you know to have
Daniel Malcolm up in lights so much
constantly at the moment yeah he would
be little taken back by that I'm sure
you know you to hold it together so well
everyone talks about how brave you are
and how controlled you are and how
amazing you are that you can actually be
here in the public eye talking about
your son and talking about what's
happened are you always this controlled
are you always this together no you can
lie this is not under oath this is your
moment of truth it's no lie we're just
beautiful people so we do have a lot of
arguments but with it sweaty at the 24/7
yeah so but both always gonna be right
it's the profit do you think you know
after all this this week this very very
big weight can you rest easier now
probably not no I mean we're in that
were public figures and people know what
we're doing and where we are and and who
we are and we're the parents with the
the boy that was missing for ten years
we'll do our best good luck thank you
well then Bruce and Denise are the
strongest people I've met but they need
your support to continue the work of the
Daniel Malcolm foundation already
hundreds of thousands of children have
heard the Malcolm's keep kids safe
campaign you can help by visiting their
website
Daniel Malcolm comm dot a you hello I'm
Tara brown thanks for watching to keep
up with the latest from 60 minutes
Australia make sure you subscribe to our
channel you can also download the 9 now
app for full episodes and other
exclusive 60 minutes content